------------------------------------------------------------------------

A data type is a characteristic of a variable that specifies the type of data it can hold and how the computer should interpret it. It is important because data types ensure that data is collected in the correct format and that each property has the expected value.

Python has the following built-in data types by default:
- Text:  `str`
- Numeric: `int`, `float`, `complex`
- Boolean: `bool`
- Sequence: `list`, `tuple`
- Mapping: `dict`
- Set: `set`

### Text Type

#### `str`

Strings are used to represents characters or a **sequence of characters**. In Python, we use quotation marks to create strings. You can use the `str` keyword to cast a variable into a string. Strings are also considered [mutable](/Resources/Differences#Mutable%20vs%20Immutable) in python.

```
name = "Semideus"
full_name = 'Semideus.dev'
another_name = str("Demigod")

print(type(name)) # Output -> str
```

### Numeric Types

#### `int`

It contains positive or negative whole numbers ie the entire **Integer** number set. You can use the `int` keyword to cast a variable into an integer.

```
age = 10
num = int("10")

print(type(age)) # Output -> int
print(type(num)) # Output -> int
```

#### `float`

It is a real number with a floating-point representation. It is specified by a decimal point.  You can use the `float` keyword to cast a variable into an float number.

```
height = 175.3
weight = float(63.5)

print(type(height)) # Output -> float
print(type(weight)) # Output -> float
```

#### `complex`

It is used to represent the **Complex** number set specified as __(real part) + (imaginary part)j__. You can use the `complex` keyword to cast a variable into an complex number

```
comp = 8 + 4j
another_comp = complex(43 + 11j)

print(type(comp)) # Output -> complex
print(type(another_comp)) # Output -> complex
```

### Boolean Type

#### `bool`

A `bool` is used to represent one of the two values i.e. `True` or `False`. Generally, it is used to represent the truth values of the expressions.

```
likes_cricket = True

print(type(likes_cricket)) # Output -> True
```

### Sequence Types

#### `list`

A **list** is a built-in dynamic sized array i.e. automatically grows and shrinks, that is used to store an ordered collection of items. You can store any datatype, including another `list` inside a list.
In Python, lists are a [mutable](Resources/Differences#Mutable%20vs%20Immutable) datatype. 

```
sports = ["F1", "Cricket", "Football"]

print(sports)
print(type(sports)) # Output -> list
```
#### `tuple`

Tuple is a collection of objects separated by commas. A tuple is similar to a Python list in terms of indexing, nested objects, and repetition but the main difference between both is Python tuple is immutable, unlike the Python list which is mutable.

Also see [Mutable vs Immutable](Resources/Differences#Mutable%20vs%20Immutable).

```
fruits = ("apple", "banana", "mango")

print(fruits)
print(type(fruits)) # Output -> tuple
```

### Mapping Type

#### `dict`

A Python dictionary is a data type that stores the value in the form of **key: value** pairs. Values in a dictionary can be of any data type and can be duplicated, whereas keys can’t be repeated and must be [immutable](Resources/Differences#Mutable%20vs%20Immutable). They are essential for efficient data mapping and manipulation

```
person = {
	"name": "Semideus.dev",
	"age": 18,
}

print(person)
print(type(person)) # Output -> dict
```

### Set Type

#### `set`

The `set`  is a data type based on the mathematical concept of a set. It is used to store a collection of items with no duplicates and has an unordered collection i.e the order in which the items of set lie may or may not change whenever that set is accessed.

```
names = {"Semideus", "Odin", "Loki"}

print(names)
print(type(names)) # Output -> set
```

